posts/gnome-control-alt-t-kitty-as-new-tab.md, before:

---
layout: doc
date: 2026-01-13
title: using gnome keyboard shortcut to create new kitty tab and general key disenshittification
description: open a new kitty instance or a new tab in existing instance with keyboard shortcut
tags:
  - gnome
  - kitty
  - ux
  - keyboard
  - note-to-self
---

<Title />   

I like to hit `ctrl+alt+t` to open a terminal instance in my gnome. Additionaly I want the keyboard-shortcut to open a new kitty instance OR if the instance already exists, it should create a new tab inside that window.

To achieve this, first I need to enable remote control in kitty config (`crtl+shift+f2`)

```config
allow_remote_control socket-only
```

Next, create the keyboard shortcut in gnome settings (_Settings_ -> _Keyboard_ -> _View and Customize Shortcuts_ -> _Custom Shortcuts_):

```sh 
sh -c "k=/home/martin/.local/kitty.app/bin/kitty; $k @ --to unix:@kt launch --type=tab && $k @ --to unix:@kt focus-window || $k --listen-on unix:@kt"
```
Replace "/home/martin/.local/kitty.app/bin/kitty" in the command with the actual path to your kitty binary.

Done! Of course you can use any other keyboard shortcut.

## Some disenshittification

using `keyd` the copilot button can be made into regular RCTRL/Menu again:

```shell
# install keyd from copr
sudo dnf copr enable alternateved/keyd
sudo dnf install keyd -y
```
`sudo mkdir /etc/keyd && sudo nano /etc/keyd/default.conf`<C/>
```ini
[ids]

*

[main]
f23+leftshift+leftmeta = timeout(rightcontrol, 500, S-f10)
capslock = leftmeta
```

Commit message:

Update configuration instructions for keyd setup
Clarified instructions for creating the config directory and file for keyd.

posts/gnome-control-alt-t-kitty-as-new-tab.md, after:

---
layout: doc
date: 2026-01-13
title: using gnome keyboard shortcut to create new kitty tab and general key disenshittification
description: open a new kitty instance or a new tab in existing instance with keyboard shortcut
tags:
  - gnome
  - kitty
  - ux
  - keyboard
  - note-to-self
---

<Title />   

I like to hit `ctrl+alt+t` to open a terminal instance in my gnome. Additionaly I want the keyboard-shortcut to open a new kitty instance OR if the instance already exists, it should create a new tab inside that window.

To achieve this, first I need to enable remote control in kitty config (`crtl+shift+f2`)

```config
allow_remote_control socket-only
```

Next, create the keyboard shortcut in gnome settings (_Settings_ -> _Keyboard_ -> _View and Customize Shortcuts_ -> _Custom Shortcuts_):

```sh 
sh -c "k=/home/martin/.local/kitty.app/bin/kitty; $k @ --to unix:@kt launch --type=tab && $k @ --to unix:@kt focus-window || $k --listen-on unix:@kt"
```
Replace "/home/martin/.local/kitty.app/bin/kitty" in the command with the actual path to your kitty binary.

Done! Of course you can use any other keyboard shortcut.

## Some disenshittification

using `keyd` the copilot button can be made into regular RCTRL/Menu again:

```shell
# install keyd from copr
sudo dnf copr enable alternateved/keyd
sudo dnf install keyd -y
```
then run `sudo mkdir /etc/keyd && sudo nano /etc/keyd/default.conf`<C/> to create the config directory and the config file. Enter:
```ini
[ids]

*

[main]
f23+leftshift+leftmeta = timeout(rightcontrol, 500, S-f10)
capslock = leftmeta
```
Now run `sudo systemctl restart keyd`<C/> and you're done. With single presses or combos the copilot button will act like the regular controll button. Pressing it longer will open the context menu.
